content/posts/20241004_fine_grained_fashion_similarity_prediction/summary.md, before:

---
title: "[Summary] Fine-Grained Fashion Similarity Prediction by Attribute-Specific Embedding Learning" 
date: 2024-08-24
tags: 
- Fine grained classification
- Transformer
- Fashion
draft: false 
---

## TL;DR
<!-- With discussions about ShopNet 2025, we get inspiration from recent research. One interesting paper is ``Fine-Grained Fashion Similarity Prediction by Attribute-Specific Embedding Learning'':  -->
In the fashion domain, visually distinct products may share fine-grained attributes like sleeve length or collar shape. Traditional methods of finding similar products often overlook these details, leading to irrelevant results for the user. 
To address this, the authors propose a model with two branches: a global branch that processes the entire image and a local branch takes a Region Of Interest (ROI) of specific attributes, identified through a spatial attention layer in the global branch. This approach improves the retrieval of items with similar attributes.

![Retrieved products](/posts/20241004_fine_grained_fashion_similarity_prediction/retrieved_products.png)

## Method
The model architecture consist of two branches: a global branch and a local branch. 

![Model architecture](/posts/20241004_fine_grained_fashion_similarity_prediction/model_architecture.png)


**Global branch.** Takes the whole image as the input and produces ROI of pre-defined attributes.
There are two attentions types: attribute-aware spatial attention (ASA) and attribute-aware channel attention (ACA). The latter is required since same regions may still be related to multiple attributes (e.g. collar design and collar color), 
With both ASA and ACA, the global branch is able to locate the related regions and capture the essential patterns w.r.t. the specified attribute.
 
**Local branch.** Takes a zoomed-in region-of-interest (RoI) w.r.t. the specified attribute of the given image as the input. This allows the local
branch for extracting more fine-grained features. The RoI is obtained by looking at the highly activate regions of the attribute-aware spatial attention of the global branch. 

Notice the local branch is dependent on the global branch, which resorts to the attribute- aware spatial attention of the global branch and regards the highly activated region of the attention map as the RoI with the given attribute.

![Localized Attributes](/posts/20241004_fine_grained_fashion_similarity_prediction/localized_attributes.png)

**Training procedure.** The aim is to have multiple attribute-specific embedding spaces where the distance in a particular space is small for images with the same specific attribute value, but large for those with different ones, i.e.products with the same Round Neck are close to each other in this attribute embeddings space but far away from those with V Neck. 
This is achieved by the triplet ranking loss which applied to both the global and local branches. 

The training procedure is done with two steps: first the global branches is trained until a reasonable ROI is produces. Then the global and local branches are jointly trained in addition to an alignment loss between the global branch and the local branch, which encourages original
images and the corresponding localized regions to be consistently embedded


## Limitations 
Attributes are pre-defined: this requires re-training when introducing an additional attribute

Embeddings are per attribute. The local feature embeddings are not "fused" somehow to the global embeddings. In product retrieval system, this requires indexing each embeddings separately leading to a large memory footprint. 


## Resource
Published in IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, MARCH 2021 
[arxiv](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2104.02429)

Commit message:

Fine-Grained Fashion Similarity Prediction by Attribute-Specific Embedding Learning v2

content/posts/20241004_fine_grained_fashion_similarity_prediction/summary.md, after:

---
title: "[Summary] Fine-Grained Fashion Similarity Prediction by Attribute-Specific Embedding Learning" 
date: 2024-08-24
tags: 
- Fine grained classification
- Transformer
- Fashion
draft: false 
---

## TL;DR
<!-- With discussions about ShopNet 2025, we get inspiration from recent research. One interesting paper is ``Fine-Grained Fashion Similarity Prediction by Attribute-Specific Embedding Learning'':  -->
In the fashion domain, visually distinct products may share fine-grained attributes like sleeve length or collar shape. Traditional methods of finding similar products often overlook these details, leading to irrelevant results for the user. 
To address this, the authors propose a model with two branches: a global branch that processes the entire image and a local branch takes a Region Of Interest (ROI) of specific attributes, identified through a spatial attention layer in the global branch. This approach improves the retrieval of items with similar attributes.

![Retrieved products](/posts/20241004_fine_grained_fashion_similarity_prediction/retrieved_products.png)

## Method
The model has two main components: a global branch and a local branch.

The **global branch** takes the entire image as input and generates Regions of Interests (ROIs) for predefined attributes. It uses two types of attention: attribute-aware spatial attention (ASA) and attribute-aware channel attention (ACA). The latter (ACA) is necessary sine the same region can correspond to multiple attributes, such as both collar design and collar color. 
With the both type of attentions, the global branch is able to identify the relevant regions of each attribute.

The **local branch** focuses on a zoomed-in ROI related to a specific attribute of the image. With this localized region, the local branch can extract more fine-grained features. The ROI is determined by the areas that show the highest activation in the attribute-aware spatial attention map from the global branch.

![Model architecture](/posts/20241004_fine_grained_fashion_similarity_prediction/model_architecture.png)

**Training Procedure.**
The goal is to create multiple embedding spaces, each focused on a specific attribute. In these spaces, products with the same attribute value (e.g., Round Neck) are close together than products with different values (e.g., V Neck) are far apart. This is achieved using a triplet ranking loss, applied to both the global and local branches.

Training happens in two stages. First, the global branch is trained until it produces reliable ROIs. Then, both the global and local branches are trained together, with an additional alignment loss that ensures the original images and their corresponding localized regions are consistently embedded (features are similar).

![Localized Attributes](/posts/20241004_fine_grained_fashion_similarity_prediction/localized_attributes.png)


## Limitations
* Attributes are predefined: The model relies on a fixed set of predefined attributes which means that a new attribute added to the system requires retraining the model. This limitation reduces the model's flexibility and scalability, particularly in domains like fashion where new styles or features frequently emerge.

* The method produces per-attribute embeddings: Each attribute has its own separate embedding space, meaning the model creates individual embeddings for each attribute (e.g., sleeve length, collar shape). These embeddings are not fused or integrated into a single global feature representation. In a product retrieval system, this separation requires that each attribute embedding be stored and indexed separately. As a result, the system may require a large memory footprint.


## Resource
Published in IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, MARCH 2021 
[arxiv](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2104.02429)
